Blog post: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable (#3472)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/blog/2023/http-conventions-declared-stable.md

{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)

### HTTP client and server span names

The `{http.method}` portion of span names is replace by `HTTP` when
`{http.method}` is `_OTHER`.

See note if [migrating from `<= v1.17.0`](#migrating-from--v1170).

References:

- [HTTP client and server span names v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#name)
- [HTTP client and server span names v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#name)

### HTTP client duration metric

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |

> | Name: `http.client.duration` &rarr; `http.client.request.duration` | |
> | Unit: `ms` &rarr; `s` | Unit changed from milliseconds to seconds |
> | Description | Updated from "_measuring the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" &rarr; the "_duration of HTTP server requests_" |
> | Histogram buckets | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |

Author: do you think this helps?

```suggestion
| **Name**: `http.client.duration` &rarr; `http.client.request.duration` | |
| **Unit**: `ms` &rarr; `s` | Unit changed from milliseconds to seconds |
| **Description** | Updated from "_measuring the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" &rarr; the "_duration of HTTP server requests_" |
| **Histogram buckets** | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |
```

Reviewer: Sure that's a good idea.
I _almost_ kept them separate: e.g., leaving those properties in a list and only putting the attributes rows in the table. Would you prefer that?

Author: > I _almost_ kept them separate: e.g., leaving those properties in a list and only putting the attributes rows in the table. Would you prefer that?

this sounds good 👍

Reviewer: I'm on it!

> <!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
> | Change | Comments |
> | --- | --- |
> | Name: `http.client.duration` &rarr; `http.client.request.duration` | |
> | Unit: `ms` &rarr; `s` | Unit changed from milliseconds to seconds |
> | Description | Updated from "_measuring the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" &rarr; the "_duration of HTTP server requests_" |
> | Histogram buckets | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metric changes:

- **Name**: `http.client.duration` &rarr; `http.client.request.duration`
- **Unit**: `ms` &rarr; `s`
- **Description**: `Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests.` &rarr;
  `Duration of HTTP server requests.`
- **Histogram buckets**: boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds
  to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed
- **Attributes**: see table below

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Attribute change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
```

| `http.status_code` &rarr; `http.response.status_code` |  |
| `net.peer.name` &rarr; `server.address` |  |
| `net.peer.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now captured even when same as default port for scheme |
| `net.sock.peer.addr` | Removed |
| `net.protocol.name` &rarr; `network.protocol.name` | Recommended &rarr; Conditionally required if not `http` and `network.protocol.version` is set |
| `net.protocol.version` &rarr; `network.protocol.version` | Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3`; see note if [migrating from `<= v1.19.0`](#migrating-from--v1190) |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Metric `http.client.duration` v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientduration)
- [Metric `http.client.request.duration` v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration)

### HTTP server duration metric

> <!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
> | Change | Comments |
> | --- | --- |
> | Name: `http.server.duration` → `http.server.request.duration` |  |
> | Unit: `ms` → `s` |  |
> | Description | Updated from "_Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" → "_Duration of HTTP server requests_" |  |
> | Histogram buckets | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metric changes:

- **Name**: `http.server.duration` -> `http.server.request.duration`
- **Unit**: `ms` -> `s`
- **Description**: `Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests.` ->
  `Duration of HTTP server requests.`
- **Histogram buckets**: boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to
  seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed
- **Attributes**: see table below

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Attribute change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
```

| `net.host.port` → `server.port` | &bullet; Recommended → Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based on HTTP headers)<br>&bullet; Now based only on [`Host` span][Host header], [`:authority` span][HTTP/2 authority], [`X-Forwarded-Host` span][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host` span][Forwarded#host] headers |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Metric `http.server.duration` v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverduration)
- [Metric `http.server.request.duration` v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.22.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration)

## Migrating from a version earlier than v1.20.0?

### Migrating from `<= v1.19.0`

> - `http.flavor` -> `network.protocol.version`
>   - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `http.flavor` &rarr; `network.protocol.version`
  - Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3`
```

### Migrating from `<= v1.18.0`

> - `http.user_agent` -> `user_agent.original`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `http.user_agent` &rarr; `user_agent.original`
```

### Migrating from `<= v1.17.0`

#### HTTP server span name

> - When `http.route` is available:<br>
>   `{http.route}` -> `{summary} {http.route}`
> - When `http.route` is not available:<br>
>   `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When `http.route` is available:<br>`{http.route}` &rarr;
  `{summary} {http.route}`
- When `http.route` is not available:<br>`HTTP {http.method}` &rarr; `{summary}`
```

Where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in
which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

#### HTTP client span name

> - `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `HTTP {http.method}` &rarr; `{summary}`
```

| `net.protocol.version` &rarr; `network.protocol.version` | &bullet; Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3`<br>&bullet; See note if [migrating from <= v1.19.0](#migrating-from--v1190) |
| `net.sock.family` | Removed |
| `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `network.peer.address` | HTTP server spans: if `http.client_ip` was unknown, then also `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; `client.address` must be provided to sampler |
| `net.sock.peer.port` &rarr; `network.peer.port` | Now captured even if same as `server.port` |
| `net.sock.peer.name` | Removed |
| New: `http.request.method_original` | Only captured when `http.request.method` is `_OTHER` |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Common attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#common-attributes)
- [Common attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes)

### HTTP client span attributes

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-client)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-client)
> 
> - `http.url` -> `url.full`
> - `http.resend_count` -> `http.request.resend_count`
> - `net.peer.name` -> `server.address`
> - `net.peer.port` -> `server.port`
>   - Now captured even when same as default port for scheme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO(@chalin): I'll move this embedded style elsewhere in a followup PR -->
<style>
.ot-table-row-1-wider td:first-child {
  width: 60%;
}
</style>

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.url` &rarr; `url.full` | |
| `http.resend_count` &rarr; `http.request.resend_count` | |
| `net.peer.name` &rarr; `server.address` | |
| `net.peer.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now captured even when same as default port for scheme |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-row-1-wider}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Client span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-client)
- [HTTP Client span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-client)
```

>   - `http` - emit the new, stable HTTP and networking conventions, and stop
>     emitting the old HTTP and networking conventions that the instrumentation
>     emitted previously.
>   - `http/dup` - emit both the old and the stable HTTP and networking
>     conventions, allowing for a seamless transition.
>   - The default behavior (in the absence of one of these values) is to
>     continue emitting whatever version of the old HTTP and networking
>     conventions the instrumentation was emitting previously.
> - SHOULD maintain (security patching at a minimum) the existing major version
>   for at least six months after it starts emitting both sets of conventions.
> - SHOULD drop the environment variable in the next major version and emit only
>   the stable HTTP and networking conventions.

## Summary of changes

In this section we summarize the changes made to the HTTP semantic conventions
from
[v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md)
to
[v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/).

> ### Common attributes across HTTP client and HTTP server spans

Reviewer: We can probably shorten this a bit, right?

```suggestion
### Common attributes across HTTP client server spans
```

---
title: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable
linkTitle: HTTP semconv are stable
date: 2023-11-03
author: '[Trask Stalnaker](https://github.com/trask) (Microsoft)'
cSpell:ignore: chalin Liudmila Molkova
---

Early this year, we launched an effort to stabilize HTTP semantic conventions.
Today, we proudly announce that the HTTP semantic conventions are the _first_
OpenTelemetry semantic conventions to be declared

> **[stable](/docs/specs/otel/document-status/)**! This inaugural stable release

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**[stable](/docs/specs/otel/document-status/)**! This inaugural stable [v1.23.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/releases/tag/v1.23.0) release
```

to use a similar migration plan when stabilizing other semantic conventions.

Specifically, when existing HTTP instrumentations published by OpenTelemetry are updated to the stable HTTP semantic conventions, they:
- Need to introduce an environment variable `OTEL_SEMCONV_STABILITY_OPT_IN`
  in their existing major version, which accepts:
  - `http` - emit the stable HTTP and networking conventions, and stop
    emitting the old HTTP and networking conventions that the instrumentation
    emitted previously.
  - `http/dup` - emit both the old and the stable HTTP and networking
    conventions, allowing for a phased rollout of the stable semantic conventions.
  - The default behavior (in the absence of one of these values) is to
    continue emitting whatever version of the old HTTP and networking
    conventions the instrumentation was emitting previously.
- Need to maintain (security patching at a minimum) the existing major version
  for at least six months after it starts emitting both sets of conventions.
- May drop the environment variable in the next major version and emit only
  the stable HTTP and networking conventions.

## Summary of changes

> In this section we summarize the changes made to the HTTP semantic conventions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we summarize the changes made to the HTTP semantic conventions
```

| `net.sock.peer.name` | Removed |
| New: `http.request.method_original` | Only captured when `http.request.method` is `_OTHER` |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Common attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#common-attributes)
- [Common attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes)

### HTTP client span attributes

[`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-client)
->
[`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-client)

- `http.url` -> `url.full`
- `http.resend_count` -> `http.request.resend_count`
- `net.peer.name` -> `server.address`
- `net.peer.port` -> `server.port`
  - Now captured even when same as default port for scheme

### HTTP server span attributes

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)
> 
> - `http.route` (No change)
> - `http.target` -> split into `url.path` and `url.query`
> - `http.scheme` -> `url.scheme`
>   - Now factors in [`X-Forwarded-Proto`][X-Forwarded-Proto],
>     [`Forwarded#proto`][Forwarded#proto] headers
> - `http.client_ip` -> `client.address`
>   - If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e. no
>     [`X-Forwarded-For`][X-Forwarded-For], [`Forwarded#for`][Forwarded#for]
>     headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `client.address`
>   - Now must be provided to sampler
> - `net.host.name` -> `server.address`
>   - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
>     [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
>     headers)
> - `net.host.port` -> `server.port`
>   - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
>     [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
>     headers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.route` | No change |
| `http.target` &rarr; `url.path` and `url.query` | Split into two separate attributes |
| `http.scheme` &rarr; `url.scheme` | Now factors in [X-Forwarded-Proto][], [Forwarded#proto][] headers |
| `http.client_ip` &rarr; `client.address` | If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e., no [X-Forwarded-For][X-Forwarded-For], [Forwarded#for][Forwarded#for] headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; now must be provided to sampler |
| `net.host.name` &rarr; `server.address` | Now based only on [Host][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority], [X-Forwarded-Host][], [Forwarded#host][] headers |
| `net.host.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now based only on [Host][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority], [X-Forwarded-Host][X-Forwarded-Host], [Forwarded#host][] headers |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)
```

| `net.host.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now based only on [Host][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority], [X-Forwarded-Host][X-Forwarded-Host], [Forwarded#host][] headers |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)

### HTTP client and server span names

The `{http.method}` portion of span names is replace by `HTTP` when
`{http.method}` is `_OTHER`.

See note if [migrating from `<= v1.17.0`](#migrating-from--v1170).

References:

- [HTTP client and server span names v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#name)
- [HTTP client and server span names v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#name)

### HTTP client duration metric

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientduration)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.22.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration)
> 
> - Name: `http.client.duration` -> `http.client.request.duration`
> - Unit: `ms` -> `s`
> - Description: `Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests.` ->
>   `Duration of HTTP server requests.`
> - Histogram buckets: boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to
>   seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed
> - Attribute changes:
>   - `http.method` -> `http.request.method`
>     - Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default plus `_OTHER`
>   - `http.status_code` -> `http.response.status_code`
>   - `net.peer.name` -> `server.address`
>   - `net.peer.port` -> `server.port`
>     - Now captured even when same as default port for scheme
>   - `net.sock.peer.addr` -> Removed
>   - `net.protocol.name` -> `network.protocol.name`
>     - Recommended -> Conditionally required if not `http` and
>       `network.protocol.version` is set
>   - `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
>     - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
>     - Note: see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier
>   - New: `error.type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| Name: `http.client.duration` &rarr; `http.client.request.duration` | |
| Unit: `ms` &rarr; `s` | Unit changed from milliseconds to seconds |
| Description | Updated from "_measuring the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" &rarr; the "_duration of HTTP server requests_" |
| Histogram buckets | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |
| `http.method` &rarr; `http.request.method` | Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default plus `_OTHER` |
| `http.status_code` &rarr; `http.response.status_code` |  |
| `net.peer.name` &rarr; `server.address` |  |
| `net.peer.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now captured even when same as default port for scheme |
| `net.sock.peer.addr` | Removed |
| `net.protocol.name` &rarr; `network.protocol.name` | Recommended &rarr; Conditionally required if not `http` and `network.protocol.version` is set |
| `net.protocol.version` &rarr; `network.protocol.version` | Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3`; see note if [migrating from `<= v1.19.0`](#migrating-from--v1190) |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Metric `http.client.duration` v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientduration)
- [Metric `http.client.request.duration` v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration)
```

Author: do you think bolding "Name:", "Unit:", "Description" and "Histogram buckets" helps?

### HTTP server duration metric

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverduration)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.22.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration)
> 
> - Name `http.server.duration` -> `http.server.request.duration`
> - Unit: `ms` -> `s`
> - Description: `Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests.` ->
>   `Duration of HTTP server requests.`
> - Histogram buckets: boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to
>   seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed
> - Attribute changes:
>   - `http.route` (No change)
>   - `http.method` -> `http.request.method`
>     - Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default plus `_OTHER`
>   - `http.status_code` -> `http.response.status_code`
>   - `http.scheme` -> `url.scheme`
>     - Now factors in [`X-Forwarded-Proto`][X-Forwarded-Proto],
>       [`Forwarded#proto`][Forwarded#proto] headers
>   - `net.protocol.name` -> `network.protocol.name`
>     - Recommended -> Conditionally required if not `http` and
>       `network.protocol.version` is set
>   - `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
>     - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
>     - Note: see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier
>   - `net.host.name` -> `server.address`
>     - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
>       on HTTP headers)
>     - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
>       [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
>       headers)
>   - `net.host.port` -> `server.port`
>     - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
>       on HTTP headers)
>     - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
>       [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
>       headers)
>   - New: `error.type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| Name: `http.server.duration` → `http.server.request.duration` |  |
| Unit: `ms` → `s` |  |
| Description | Updated from "_Measures the duration of inbound HTTP requests_" → "_Duration of HTTP server requests_" |  |
| Histogram buckets | Boundaries updated to reflect change from milliseconds to seconds, and zero bucket boundary removed |
| `http.route` | No change |
| `http.method` → `http.request.method` | Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default plus `_OTHER` |
| `http.status_code` → `http.response.status_code` |  |
| `http.scheme` → `url.scheme` | Now factors in [`X-Forwarded-Proto` span][X-Forwarded-Proto], [`Forwarded#proto` span][Forwarded#proto] headers |
| `net.protocol.name` → `network.protocol.name` | Recommended → Conditionally required if not `http` and `network.protocol.version` is set |
| `net.protocol.version` → `network.protocol.version` | Examples fixed: `2.0` → `2` and `3.0` → `3`; see note if [migrating from `<= v1.19.0`](#migrating-from--v1190) |
| `net.host.name` → `server.address` | &bullet; Recommended → Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based on HTTP headers)<br>&bullet; Now based only on [`Host` span][Host header], [`:authority` span][HTTP/2 authority], [`X-Forwarded-Host` span][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host` span][Forwarded#host] headers |
| `net.host.port` → `server.port` | &bullet; Recommended → Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based on HTTP headers)<br>&bullet; Now based only on [`Host` span][Host header], [`:authority` span][HTTP/2 authority], [`X-Forwarded-Host` span][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host` span][Forwarded#host] headers |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Metric `http.server.duration` v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/metrics/semantic_conventions/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverduration)
- [Metric `http.server.request.duration` v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.22.0/docs/http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration)
```

---

> title: HTTP semantic conventions are declared stable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable
```

> linkTitle: HTTP semantic conventions

Reviewer: How about:

```suggestion
linkTitle: HTTP semconv are stable
```

date: 2023-11-03
author: '[Trask Stalnaker](https://github.com/trask) (Microsoft)'
cSpell:ignore: stalnaker trask
---

Earlier this year we embarked on a three month project to stabilize HTTP semantic conventions.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

We are proud to announce (nine months later), that the HTTP semantic conventions are now the first OpenTelemetry semantic convention to be declared stable!

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This stable version is a significant evolution over the previous unstable version.

Because of the number of changes, and because of the number of users impacted by these changes, we have mapped out

> a transition plan for instrumentations to follow when updating to the stable version which prioritizes our users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a transition plan for instrumentations to follow when updating to the stable version, which prioritizes our users.
```

> We also want to share some of the reasons behind these changes, as we think that the stable version brings many

Reviewer: I think that we need a section title just before here to give context to "the reasons behind these changes". Here's a suggestion (not the best, but it's all I can think of atm):

```suggestion
## Rational for reworked HTTP semconv

We also want to share some of the reasons behind these changes, as we think that the stable version brings many
```

> significant improvements which will make the pain of this upgrade worth it in the long run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
significant improvements that make the upgrade worth it in the long run.
```

> ## Aligning with other open standards

Reviewer: This and the other level-2 headings below don't quite make sense as separate sections. Maybe they need to be list bullets? If I understand their purpose, I think that these are meant to be named reasons for the HTTP changes? If so, that needs to be made clear.

Author: ya, thx, I agree, I reduced it to a more simplified list of bullets

> Earlier this year we announced [the merging of Elastic Common Schema into OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions]([https://opentelemetry.io/blog/2023/ecs-otel-semconv-convergence/]).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earlier this year we announced [the merging of Elastic Common Schema into OpenTelemetry Semantic Conventions](/blog/2023/ecs-otel-semconv-convergence/).
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This merger brought several direct benefits to the HTTP semantic conventions.

One was the transition from `net.host.*` and `net.peer.*`

> to `client.*` and `server.*`, which has a number of benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to `client.*` and `server.*` attributes, which has a number of benefits:
```

* works better for logs (where there's no span kind)
* improves correlation across client and server telemetry (e.g. since you can join on `server.address` instead of joining where
`net.peer.addr` == `net.host.addr`)
* is generally more intuitive compared to `net.host.*` and `net.peer.*`
* left open the `network.peer.*` and `network.local.*` namespace for low-level network instrumentation where peer and local concepts are more natural

Another was the `url.*` namespace, which allows these attributes to be reused in non-HTTP semantic conventions
in the future.

And another was improved consistency of namespaces,
e.g. `http.request.method` instead of `http.method`, and `http.response.status_code` instead of `http.status_code`,
which match the other `http.request.*` and `http.response.*` attributes.

> Better alignment with Prometheus by adopting seconds as the standard unit for metrics.

Reviewer 2: it does not seem to be relevant to ECS, perhaps `Metric cardinality` below can be renamed to something like `Metrics improvements` and this sentence can go there?

## Telemetry has a cost

Just because we can capture something, doesn't mean we should capture it by default.

Capturing, processing, and storing telemetry has a cost, and we should consider this when deciding which attributes
are recommended vs opt-in.

## Default values can be problematic

Even though default values can help with cost, in some cases they can make it impossible for consumers of that
telemetry to tell the difference between an uncaptured value and the default value.

## Metric cardinality

> For example, in the previous version, `http.method` could be spammed by an attacker, causing an explosion in that

Reviewer 2: maybe add some intro like 
```suggestion
Metrics are sensitive to cardinality, so we made sure to sanitize and normalize attribute values. For example, in the previous version, `http.method` could be spammed by an attacker, causing an explosion in that
```

Author: I ended up simplifying these sections down a lot

one dimension. With the OpenTelemetry Metric SDK's (configurable) cardinality cap, this doesn't cause a memory
explosion, but it does cause a degradation in your observability of HTTP metrics since the cardinality cap is hit
just with that one dimension.

In the stable version, `http.request.method` is limited to a (configurable) set of known HTTP methods.

When there is an unknown value, it is stored in `http.request.method_original`, and `http.request.method` is set to `_OTHER`.

This allows the same definition of `http.request.method` to be used on both spans and metrics, which supports correlation between spans and metrics
(and also other use cases like span-to-metric pipelines, and instrumentations which unify attribute capture across both
spans and metrics).

> # Transition plan

Reviewer: You can't have a level-1 heading in this page. You'll need to promote all headings by one level below this point, e.g.:

```suggestion
## Transition plan
```

> **Warning**

> > Existing HTTP instrumentations that are using
> > [v1.20.0 of this document](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md)
> > (or prior):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Existing HTTP instrumentations that are using
> [v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md)
> of the [Semantic Conventions for HTTP](/docs/specs/semconv/http/)
> (or prior):
```

  * `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

#### HTTP client span name:

* `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

[Host header]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230#section-5.4
[HTTP/2 authority]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9113#section-8.3.1
[Forwarded#for]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#for
[Forwarded#for]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#for
[Forwarded#proto]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#proto
[Forwarded#host]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#host
[X-Forwarded-For]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For
[X-Forwarded-Proto]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-Proto
[X-Forwarded-Host]: https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-Host

## Thanks

This was a huge community effort that spanned many many people. Thank you to everyone who contributed!

> And special thanks to [Liudmila Molkova](https://github.com/lmolkova) for her HTTP domain expertise and for helping to drive this effort every step of the way.

Reviewer 2: 🙇‍♀️

---
title: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable
linkTitle: HTTP semconv are stable
date: 2023-11-03
author: '[Trask Stalnaker](https://github.com/trask) (Microsoft)'

> cSpell:ignore: Liudmila Molkova

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cSpell:ignore: chalin Liudmila Molkova
```

<style>
.ot-table-first-row-50 td:first-child { width: 50%; }
.ot-table-first-row-60 td:first-child { width: 60%; }
</style>

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.url` &rarr; `url.full` | |
| `http.resend_count` &rarr; `http.request.resend_count` | |
| `net.peer.name` &rarr; `server.address` | |
| `net.peer.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now captured even when same as default port for scheme |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-60}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Client span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-client)
- [HTTP Client span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-client)

### HTTP server span attributes

<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.route` | No change |
| `http.target` &rarr; `url.path` and `url.query` | Split into two separate attributes |
| `http.scheme` &rarr; `url.scheme` | Now factors in [X-Forwarded-Proto][], [Forwarded#proto][] headers |

> | `http.client_ip` &rarr; `client.address` | If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e., no [X-Forwarded-For][X-Forwarded-For], [Forwarded#for][Forwarded#for] headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; now must be provided to sampler |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `http.client_ip` &rarr; `client.address` | If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e., no [X-Forwarded-For][X-Forwarded-For], [Forwarded#for][] headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; now must be provided to sampler |
```

| `http.client_ip` &rarr; `client.address` | If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e., no [X-Forwarded-For][X-Forwarded-For], [Forwarded#for][Forwarded#for] headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; now must be provided to sampler |
| `net.host.name` &rarr; `server.address` | Now based only on [Host][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority], [X-Forwarded-Host][], [Forwarded#host][] headers |
| `net.host.port` &rarr; `server.port` | Now based only on [Host][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority], [X-Forwarded-Host][X-Forwarded-Host], [Forwarded#host][] headers |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive .ot-table-first-row-50}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
- [HTTP Server span attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)

### HTTP client and server span names

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#name)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#name)
> 
> The `{http.method}` portion of span names is replace by `HTTP` when
> `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`.
> 
> Note: see below if updating from version `v1.17.0` or earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `{http.method}` portion of span names is replace by `HTTP` when
`{http.method}` is `_OTHER`.

See note if [migrating from `<= v1.17.0`](#migrating-from--v1170).

References:

- [HTTP client and server span names v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#name)
- [HTTP client and server span names v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#name)
```

      `network.protocol.version` is set
  - `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
    - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
    - Note: see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier
  - `net.host.name` -> `server.address`
    - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
      on HTTP headers)
    - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
      [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
      headers)
  - `net.host.port` -> `server.port`
    - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
      on HTTP headers)
    - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
      [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
      headers)
  - New: `error.type`

## Migrating from a version earlier than v1.20.0?

### Migrating from `<= v1.19.0`

- `http.flavor` -> `network.protocol.version`
  - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`

### Migrating from `<= v1.18.0`

- `http.user_agent` -> `user_agent.original`

### Migrating from `<= v1.17.0`

#### HTTP server span name

> - when `http.route` is available
>   - `{http.route}` -> `{summary} {http.route}`
> - when `http.route` is not available
>   - `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`
> 
> where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When `http.route` is available:<br>
  `{http.route}` -> `{summary} {http.route}`
- When `http.route` is not available:<br>
  `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

Where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in
```

which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

#### HTTP client span name

- `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

> where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in
```

>     emitting the old HTTP and networking conventions that the instrumentation
>     emitted previously.
>   - `http/dup` - emit both the old and the stable HTTP and networking
>     conventions, allowing for a seamless transition.
>   - The default behavior (in the absence of one of these values) is to
>     continue emitting whatever version of the old HTTP and networking
>     conventions the instrumentation was emitting previously.
> - SHOULD maintain (security patching at a minimum) the existing major version
>   for at least six months after it starts emitting both sets of conventions.
> - SHOULD drop the environment variable in the next major version and emit only
>   the stable HTTP and networking conventions.

## Summary of changes

In this section we summarize the changes made to the HTTP semantic conventions
from
[v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md)
to [v1.23.0
(stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/).

### Common attributes across HTTP client and HTTP server spans

> [`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#common-attributes)
> ->
> [`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes)
> 
> - `http.method` -> `http.request.method`
>   - Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default (configurable) plus
>     `_OTHER`
> - `http.status_code` -> `http.response.status_code`
> - `http.request.header.<key>`
>   - Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed
>   - HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler
> - `http.response.header.<key>`
>   - Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed
> - `http.request_content_length` -> `http.request.body.size`
>   - Recommended -> Opt-In
>   - _Not marked stable yet_
> - `http.response_content_length` -> `http.response.body.size`
>   - Recommended -> Opt-In
>   - _Not marked stable yet_
> - `user_agent.original`
>   - HTTP Client spans: Recommended -> Opt-In
>   - HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler
>   - (see below if updating from version `v1.18.0` or earlier)
> - `net.protocol.name` -> `network.protocol.name`
>   - Recommended -> Conditionally required if not `http` and
>     `network.protocol.version` is set
> - `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
>   - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
>   - (see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier)
> - `net.sock.family` -> Removed
> - `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `network.peer.address`
>   - HTTP server spans: if `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e. no
>     [`X-Forwarded-For`][X-Forwarded-For], [`Forwarded#for`][Forwarded#for]
>     headers), then _also_ `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `client.address` (and note
>     `client.address` must be provided to sampler)
> - `net.sock.peer.port` -> `network.peer.port`
>   - Now captured even if same as `server.port`
> - `net.sock.peer.name` -> Removed
> - New: `http.request.method_original` (only captured when `http.request.method`
>   is `_OTHER`)
> - New: `error.type`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.method` &rarr; `http.request.method` | Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default (configurable) plus `_OTHER` |
| `http.status_code` &rarr; `http.response.status_code` |  |
| `http.request.header.<key>` | &bullet; Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed<br>&bullet; HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler |
| `http.response.header.<key>` | Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed |
| `http.request_content_length` &rarr; `http.request.body.size` | &bullet; Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; _Not marked stable yet_ |
| `http.response_content_length` &rarr; `http.response.body.size` | &bullet; Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; _Not marked stable yet_ |
| `user_agent.original` | &bullet; HTTP Client spans: Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler<br>&bullet; See note if [migrating from <= v1.18.0](#migrating-from--v1180) |
| `net.protocol.name` &rarr; `network.protocol.name` | Recommended &rarr; Conditionally required if not `http` and `network.protocol.version` is set |
| `net.protocol.version` &rarr; `network.protocol.version` | &bullet; Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3`<br>&bullet; See note if [migrating from <= v1.19.0](#migrating-from--v1190) |
| `net.sock.family` | Removed |
| `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `network.peer.address` | HTTP server spans: if `http.client_ip` was unknown, then also `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; `client.address` must be provided to sampler |
| `net.sock.peer.port` &rarr; `network.peer.port` | Now captured even if same as `server.port` |
| `net.sock.peer.name` | Removed |
| New: `http.request.method_original` | Only captured when `http.request.method` is `_OTHER` |
| New: `error.type` |  |
{.td-initial .table .table-responsive}
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

References:

- [Common attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#common-attributes)
- [Common attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes)
```

---
title: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable
linkTitle: HTTP semconv are stable
date: 2023-11-03
author: '[Trask Stalnaker](https://github.com/trask) (Microsoft)'
cSpell:ignore: Liudmila Molkova
---

Early this year we embarked on a three month project to stabilize HTTP semantic
conventions. We are proud to announce (nine months later), that the HTTP
semantic conventions are now the first OpenTelemetry semantic convention to be
declared stable! The stable version is a significant evolution over the previous
unstable version:

> 

Reviewer 3: ... such as? Would be good to provide a bit more context and an example here.

Author: the list below are the examples, I think @chalin's suggestions have made this clearer, but let me know what you think

- Improvements brought over from the
  [alignment with Elastic Common Schema](/blog/2023/ecs-otel-semconv-convergence/)
  - The `url.*` namespace, which can be reused in the future by non-HTTP
    semantic conventions
  - The `client.*` and `server.*` namespaces, which are easier to reason about

>     and work better on logs (where there is no span kind)

Reviewer 3: What exactly does that mean?

Author: I've expanded this bullet, lmk if it helps

  - More consistency around using the `http.request.*` and `http.response.*`
    namespaces
- Further alignment with Prometheus by adopting seconds as the standard unit for
  metrics

> - Attributes which are less generally useful are no longer captured by default

Reviewer 3: As a reader, not sure I understand what you mean with "to implement a transition plan". What do I have to do, if anything? Are there scripts that help me automate things? Maybe I don't need to do anything since OpenTelemetry is taking care of it, etc.

I suggest being more explicit about expectations and shared responsibility model.

Author: thx, I redid the transition plan section to try to make it clearer, ptal

  in order to reduce the cost of capturing, processing, and storing telemetry
- Default values are now used carefully so that there's no ambiguity whether an
  attribute's absence represents the default value or not

> - Metric cardinality problems have been addressed

Author: ```suggestion
- HTTP metrics are no longer vulnerable to cardinality explosion
  - `http.request.method` is limited to a (configurable) set of known methods
  - `server.address` and `server.port`, which are influenced by the `Host` header, are now Opt-In on HTTP metrics
```

> ## Transition plan

Reviewer: Could we call this a **Migration** plan instead?

```suggestion
## Migration plan
```

Because of the number of changes, and because of the number of users impacted by
these changes, we are requiring instrumentations to implement a transition plan
to help users manage the process of upgrading to the stable HTTP semantic
conventions. We plan to use a similar transition plan when stabilizing other
semantic conventions.

> A warning like this appears at the top of stable HTTP semantic convention pages:

Author: I redid this section to try to make it clearer

- `http.response_content_length` -> `http.response.body.size`
  - Recommended -> Opt-In
  - _Not marked stable yet_
- `user_agent.original`
  - HTTP Client spans: Recommended -> Opt-In
  - HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler
  - (see below if updating from version `v1.18.0` or earlier)
- `net.protocol.name` -> `network.protocol.name`
  - Recommended -> Conditionally required if not `http` and
    `network.protocol.version` is set
- `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
  - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
  - (see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier)
- `net.sock.family` -> Removed
- `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `network.peer.address`
  - HTTP server spans: if `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e. no
    [`X-Forwarded-For`][X-Forwarded-For], [`Forwarded#for`][Forwarded#for]
    headers), then _also_ `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `client.address` (and note
    `client.address` must be provided to sampler)
- `net.sock.peer.port` -> `network.peer.port`
  - Now captured even if same as `server.port`
- `net.sock.peer.name` -> Removed
- New: `http.request.method_original` (only captured when `http.request.method`
  is `_OTHER`)

> - New: `error.type`

Reviewer: I think that this change info would be easier to read as a table, like the following. If you agree, I can update the sections accordingly:

---

| Change | Comments |
| --- | --- |
| `http.method` &rarr; `http.request.method` | Now captures only 9 common HTTP methods by default (configurable) plus `_OTHER` |
| `http.status_code` &rarr; `http.response.status_code` |  |
| `http.request.header.<key>` | &bullet; Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed<br>&bullet; HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler |
| `http.response.header.<key>` | Dash (`"-"`) to underscore (`"_"`) normalization in `<key>` has been removed |
| `http.request_content_length` &rarr; `http.request.body.size` | &bullet; Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; _Not marked stable yet_ |
| `http.response_content_length` &rarr; `http.response.body.size` | &bullet; Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; _Not marked stable yet_ |
| `user_agent.original` | &bullet; HTTP Client spans: Recommended &rarr; Opt-In<br>&bullet; HTTP Server spans: now must be provided to sampler (see below if updating from version `v1.18.0` or earlier) |
| `net.protocol.name` &rarr; `network.protocol.name` | Recommended &rarr; Conditionally required if not `http` and `network.protocol.version` is set |
| `net.protocol.version` &rarr; `network.protocol.version` | Examples fixed: `2.0` &rarr; `2` and `3.0` &rarr; `3` (see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier) |
| `net.sock.family` | Removed |
| `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `network.peer.address` | HTTP server spans: if `http.client_ip` was unknown, then also `net.sock.peer.addr` &rarr; `client.address`; `client.address` must be provided to sampler |
| `net.sock.peer.port` &rarr; `network.peer.port` | Now captured even if same as `server.port` |
| `net.sock.peer.name` | Removed |
| New: `http.request.method_original` | Only captured when `http.request.method` is `_OTHER` |
| New: `error.type` |  |

References:

- [Common attributes v1.20.0](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#common-attributes)
- [Common attributes v1.23.0 (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#common-attributes)

Reviewer: I'll add the suggestion above via a GH suggestion as agreed to out-of-band with @trask. Marking this resolved.

> ### HTTP client span attributes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HTTP client span attributes
```

[`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-client)
->
[`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-client)

- `http.url` -> `url.full`
- `http.resend_count` -> `http.request.resend_count`
- `net.peer.name` -> `server.address`
- `net.peer.port` -> `server.port`
  - Now captured even when same as default port for scheme

> ### HTTP server span attributes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HTTP server span attributes
```

[`v1.20.0`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/v1.20.0/specification/trace/semantic_conventions/http.md#http-server)
->
[`v1.23.0` (stable)](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/v1.23.0/docs/http/http-spans.md#http-server)

- `http.route` (No change)
- `http.target` -> split into `url.path` and `url.query`
- `http.scheme` -> `url.scheme`
  - Now factors in [`X-Forwarded-Proto`][X-Forwarded-Proto],
    [`Forwarded#proto`][Forwarded#proto] headers
- `http.client_ip` -> `client.address`
  - If `http.client_ip` was unknown (i.e. no
    [`X-Forwarded-For`][X-Forwarded-For], [`Forwarded#for`][Forwarded#for]
    headers), then `net.sock.peer.addr` -> `client.address`
  - Now must be provided to sampler
- `net.host.name` -> `server.address`
  - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
    [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
    headers)
- `net.host.port` -> `server.port`
  - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
    [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
    headers)

> ### HTTP client and server span names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### HTTP client and server span names
```

  - `http.status_code` -> `http.response.status_code`
  - `http.scheme` -> `url.scheme`
    - Now factors in [`X-Forwarded-Proto`][X-Forwarded-Proto],
      [`Forwarded#proto`][Forwarded#proto] headers
  - `net.protocol.name` -> `network.protocol.name`
    - Recommended -> Conditionally required if not `http` and
      `network.protocol.version` is set
  - `net.protocol.version` -> `network.protocol.version`
    - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`
    - Note: see below if updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier
  - `net.host.name` -> `server.address`
    - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
      on HTTP headers)
    - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
      [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
      headers)
  - `net.host.port` -> `server.port`
    - Recommended -> Opt-In (due to high-cardinality vulnerability since based
      on HTTP headers)
    - Now based only on [`Host`][Host header], [:authority][HTTP/2 authority],
      [`X-Forwarded-Host`][X-Forwarded-Host], [`Forwarded#host`][Forwarded#host]
      headers)
  - New: `error.type`

> ## If you are coming from an earlier semantic convention version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Migrating from a version earlier than v1.20.0?
```

> ### If updating from version `v1.19.0` or earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating from `<= v1.19.0`
```

- `http.flavor` -> `network.protocol.version`
  - Examples fixed: `2.0` -> `2` and `3.0` -> `3`

> ### If updating from version `v1.18.0` or earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating from `<= v1.18.0`
```

- `http.user_agent` -> `user_agent.original`

> ### If updating from version `v1.17.0` or earlier:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Migrating from `<= v1.17.0`
```

> #### HTTP server span name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### HTTP server span name
```

- when `http.route` is available
  - `{http.route}` -> `{summary} {http.route}`
- when `http.route` is not available
  - `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in
which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

> #### HTTP client span name:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### HTTP client span name
```

- `HTTP {http.method}` -> `{summary}`

where `{summary}` is `{http.method}`, unless `{http.method}` is `_OTHER`, in
which case `{summary}` is `HTTP`.

[Host header]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7230#section-5.4
[HTTP/2 authority]: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc9113#section-8.3.1
[Forwarded#for]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#for
[Forwarded#proto]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#proto
[Forwarded#host]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Forwarded#host
[X-Forwarded-For]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-For
[X-Forwarded-Proto]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-Proto
[X-Forwarded-Host]:
  https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/X-Forwarded-Host

> ## Thanks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Community Kudos
```

> This was a huge community effort that spanned many many people. Thank you to
> everyone who contributed! And special thanks to
> [Liudmila Molkova](https://github.com/lmolkova) for her HTTP domain expertise
> and for helping to drive this effort every step of the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was a massive community effort: thanks to all who got involved! A special thanks to
[Liudmila Molkova](https://github.com/lmolkova) for sharing her HTTP domain expertise, which helped drive this effort every step of the way.
```

---
title: HTTP semantic conventions declared stable
linkTitle: HTTP semconv are stable

> date: 2023-11-03

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
date: 2023-11-06
```

      can join directly on `server.address` instead of joining where
      `net.peer.addr` == `net.host.addr`)
    - Provides a clean separation from the `network.*` namespace which is now
      only for low-level network attributes
  - More consistency around using the `http.request.*` and `http.response.*`
    namespaces
- Improved consistency with Prometheus through standardization on seconds for
  metric units.
- Streamlined attribute capture by omitting less useful attributes, reducing
  telemetry capture, processing, and storage costs.
- Clarified the definition of default values, eliminating ambiguities when
  attributes are absent.
- HTTP metrics are no longer vulnerable to cardinality explosion
  - `http.request.method` is limited to a (configurable) set of known methods
  - `server.address` and `server.port`, which are influenced by the `Host`
    header, are now Opt-In on HTTP metrics

## Migration plan

Due to the significant number of modifications and the extensive user base
affected by them, we require existing HTTP instrumentations published by
OpenTelemetry to implement a migration plan that will assist users in

> transitioning to the stable HTTP semantic conventions. We plan to use a similar
> migration plan when stabilizing other semantic conventions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transitioning to stable HTTP semantic conventions. We intend to use a similar
strategy when stabilizing other semantic conventions.
```
